Efficiency in Order: A Comparative Visualization of Sorting Algorithms for Enhanced Algorithmic Understanding

Algorithms, Data Visualization

Create a program that visualizes various sorting algorithms like Bubble Sort, Merge Sort, Quick Sort, etc. This project will help you understand and compare the efficiency of different sorting algorithms.

Web development tools (e.g., text editor), web browser

Web development frameworks (e.g., React, Vue), visualization libraries

Help users understand how various sorting algorithms work and their differences


Help users understand how various sorting algorithms work and their differences

Help users understand how various sorting algorithms work and their differences.[using python and its libraries]

I'll create a short todo list, then add a Streamlit-based Python app plus helper modules to visualize multiple sorting algorithms, and finally run a quick syntax check. Expected outcome: new files added and a basic sanity check passed. I'll start by writing the todo list.

Created 5 todos

Created algorithms.py

Created app.py

Created requirements.txt

Created README.md


python -m py_compile "c:\Users\Mavis\.vscode\School\DAA\Project\algorithms.py" "c:\Users\Mavis\.vscode\School\DAA\Project\app.py"

Now I'll mark the todo items as completed for the work I just did. Expected outcome: updated todo statuses.

Completed (1/5) Project scaffold

Progress update — what I did

Created a small Streamlit-based sorting visualizer (Python) and helper module.

Created a small Streamlit-based sorting visualizer (Python) and helper module.
Implemented generator-style sorting algorithms that yield snapshots: Bubble, Selection, Insertion, Merge, Quick (in algorithms.py).
Built a Streamlit UI (app.py) with controls: algorithm, array size, speed, randomize, Start/Stop/Step.
Added requirements.txt and README.md.
Ran a quick syntax/compile check on the new files.
Files added (location: c:\Users\Mavis.vscode\School\DAA\Project)

algorithms.py — sorting algorithms that yield visualization snapshots; helper random_array.
app.py — Streamlit application that animates snapshots with matplotlib bar charts and provides controls.
Files added (location: c:\Users\Mavis.vscode\School\DAA\Project)

algorithms.py — sorting algorithms that yield visualization snapshots; helper random_array.
app.py — Streamlit application that animates snapshots with matplotlib bar charts and provides controls.
requirements.txt — streamlit, numpy, matplotlib.
README.md — run instructions and notes.
How to run (short)
How to run (short)

Create & activate a venv (PowerShell):
Install dependencies:
Start the app:
Notes, verifications, and caveats

I ran a quick Python compile check for syntax; the source modules are syntactically valid.
The Streamlit app imports streamlit, numpy, and matplotlib; they must be installed (see requirements).

Notes, verifications, and caveats

I ran a quick Python compile check for syntax; the source modules are syntactically valid.
The Streamlit app imports streamlit, numpy, and matplotlib; they must be installed (see requirements).
The visualizer uses generator snapshots; for Merge and Quick I implemented approaches that yield intermediate states. Quick sort is implemented using an explicit stack (iterative) to simplify yielding snapshots deterministically.
The UI is intentionally simple for education and comparison. It shows active indices (red) and sorted indices (green).

Suggested next improvements (I can implement any of these)

Add swap/comparison counters shown live.
Add more algorithms: Heap sort, Shell sort, TimSort.
Allow saving/exporting animations or step logs.
Add color/legend and tooltips for education (explain steps).
Add unit tests validating that each algorithm yields a final sorted array and that generators behave properly.
If you want, I can:

Install additional algorithms (Heap, Shell).
Add counters (comparisons/swaps).
Add a demo GIF builder or export for slides.
Make the UI fancier (play/pause/seek bar, reversed stepping).